---
layout: post
title: "Kegan's Framework"
excerpt: What is Kegan's theory of adult development?
categories: [review]
comments: true
---

20:14, couch, 16-6xx, Cambridge

This might be the first in a series of pieces I try to write about some currently-developing thoughts about this concept of “mind-like-water”. Also, this particular post is heavily plagiarizing Jennifer Bergan’s “Summary of the Constructive-Deveolpmental Theory of Robert Kegan, because I am too lazy to put everything into quotes…when in doubt, just assume it’s not mine.

I recently read a piece explaining Kegan’s theory of adult development. It’s a pretty interesting theory, with five stages that describe not the things a person knows at that stage, but the way in which they interpret or know these things, and thus how they bring meaning to their lives. That is, Kegan’s five stages involve qualitatively different ways of constructing reality. During a transition to a higher stage, people move the elements of the earlier meaning-making system from Subject (where controlled them) to Object (where they gain a new sense of control over the meaning-making system itself). This might be a little high-level and vague, but hopefully the descriptions that follow will clarify things a bit more.

Also, it’s worth noting that these stages are not step functions. A person slowly transitions from one to another, and may very well have a mix of various stages at any given period of life. (Perhaps “stages” is not a very good name, then.) Furthermore, the theory is  /not/ a claim that more complex frameworks are inherently better, or that that more complex systems correlates with intelligence, morality, or psychological wellness.

First order: the magical childhood mind

In Kegan’s First order, common to young children, there is no idea of “durable objects”—which is the notion that things in the world retain the same qualities over time. When people at this stage look out of an airplane and see how small people look, they believe the people actually are small. They also believe that others can share in the full imaginary life that’s constantly in play for them, and don’t grasp theory of mind. Children in this order need to be reminded of the rules over and over, because they can’t hold the ideas in their mind for very long; the rule that existed yesterday about drawing on the walls might not seem to apply today—or might apply to the walls in the kitchen but not the bedroom. The First order is a time of magic and mystery as the world inexplicably changes from moment to moment.

Second order: the self-sovereign mind

Kegan’s Second order was once thought to belong exclusively to older children and adolescents, but there is increasing evidence that adults can spend many years in this order as well (Adult Development Research Group, 2001). Demographic evidence shows that between 13% and 36% of adults aged 19-55 (depending on the study population) make meaning at this order.

When people learn that objects stay the same no matter what their own relationship is to the object (e.g., when I walk away from the car and it looks smaller, the car isn’t actually shrinking), their world becomes less magical and more complex. They discover that they have beliefs and feelings that also remain constant over time (e.g., I love chocolate but hate tomatoes). This insight lets them know that other people have opinions and beliefs that remain constant, too. Their concrete understandings let them know that a rule yesterday is probably a rule today as well. If the rule feels problematic, their orientation is to worry about the consequences of breaking it or to figure out how to get past it, as opposed to changing it.

While they are aware that others have feelings and desires, they cannot hold both their own perspective and the perspective of another simultaneously. Mostly other people’s interests are important only if they interfere with the interests of the person at the Second order. When friends do not lie to each other, it is because of a fear of retaliation or loss or because it costs them nothing to be truthful. People at this order may appear extremely rule-bound, following various philosophies or mandates because of the possibility of external rewards or punishments. They may also appear self-centered and might see others as helpers or barriers on the road to get to their desires.

Third order: the socialized mind

People can begin to enter into the Third order during adolescence, and there is a great deal of evidence that they can live much or all of their lives at this order. Studies have shown that there is a large percentage of adults—of all ages, occupations, and socio-economic classes—who inhabit this world. Studies reported in Kegan (1994) show that between 43% and 46% of adults aged 19-55 make meaning here.

At the Third order, others are no longer just a means to an end; they have internalized one or more systems of meaning (e.g. their family’s values, a political ideology, a professional culture). As a result, they have developed the ability to subordinate their desires (previously at Subject-level) and instead be guided by the norms and standards of their meaning system(s). It is as if, in their growth from the Second order, those at the Third order have welcomed a Board of Directors (Kegan, 1994) into their decision making and now have the ideas or voices of important other ideologies, institutions, or people with them as they make their decisions.

The major limitation of this order is that, when there is a conflict between important ideologies, institutions, or people, those at the Third order feel torn in two and cannot find a way to make a decision; there is no sense of what I want outside of others’ expectations or societal roles. He may turn to others to tell him how to best resolve this conflict, and will be increasingly bewildered if there is no consensus about the resolution or if others tell him to decide for himself. Acting at this order is generally admirable, even responsible in teenagers, but, in adults, it can often seem like a personality flaw.

The very notion of “self-esteem” as it is generally constructed is inappropriate at this order because this construction of self-esteem requires an internal source for feeling good about oneself. Although they themselves do not experience it this way, those at the Third order do not have an independently-constructed self to feel good about; their esteem is entirely reliant on others because they are, in many ways, made up of those around them. A student making meaning at this order may not know whether he has successfully mastered a particular concept until he sees his grade on a test; an executive at this order may not know whether a particular meeting was successful or not until colleagues give feedback.

Case study. A responsible, hard working teacher, Walter is strongly invested in teaching as a career and in the success of his students. He is intelligent, highly educated, and knowledgeable about his certification area of science. He is also very reflective and curious, and he works hard to be a better teacher through discussions with his colleagues and reading books that help him make sense of the complexities of a difficult profession. He is strongly invested in being a success as a teacher, and he wishes he were confident about “doing the right thing.”

Walter names some of the limits of his own understanding—some of the feeling of being in over his head—when he speaks of disliking this single role and wishing he could find a way to get away from it to “somehow strike a balance” in his life. While a teacher at any order might find himself working too many hours and frustrated about that situation, the thing that makes Walter’s frustration Third order is his seeming lack of control over it. He describes himself as “a slave” to “the restrictive life style” of his teaching. He is frustrated with himself for his deficiencies admitting, “I don’t know how to strike that balance yet.”

Fourth order: the self-authored mind

The Fourth order seems familiar to those who work with adults because it is the order that looks the most like modern images of the way adults are supposed to be in North American culture. The most surprising thing about this order, in fact, is that there are so many adults who have not yet reached this level of complexity. Research shows that between 18% and 34% of adults between 19 and 55 make meaning at this order (Kegan, 1994).

Adults at the Fourth order have achieved all that those at the Third order have, but now they have created a self that is the author of all its connections to the ideologies, institutions, or people, who can question these beliefs and update on an as-needed basis. These are the people who “own” their work, who have articulated their personal theories, who are self-guided, self-motivated, self-evaluative, and self-correcting. The Board of Directors that was welcomed in the Third order now is governed by the person themselves.

Unlike those at the Third order, Fourth order adults don’t feel torn apart by the conflicts of different meaning systems because they have their own system with which to make decisions. Instead, they may feel torn apart by disagreeing pieces of themselves which are both working in service of a larger, self-authored (but relatively unquestioned) goal. For example, at the Fourth order, Walter’s conflict about striking the right balance between being a teacher and “having a life” might be reinterpreted in this way: “Part of me wants to spend all my free time working on my teaching because I think teaching is so hard that it takes all of my energy to do it well. Another part of me, though, knows that if all I ever do is work as a teacher, there will be less richness to the experience that I bring into the classroom in general which will limit my effectiveness as a teacher. I feel frustrated with myself for not being able to strike a good balance”  It is not the role itself which is creating the tearing in this conflict; instead, it is the self-authored system itself which is feeling torn apart.

As is true with every qualitatively different order of mind, the gains one makes from a previous order also describe the limits of the new order. The gain of the Fourth order meaning-making system is that the person has a self-authored system, a way to generate larger goals, principles, and commitments that transcend any one particular culture. The limit of the Fourth order meaning-making system is that a person becomes embedded in (and is Subject to) this self-authored system. If a teacher were farther along the developmental journey beyond the Fourth order, he might question the very goal of “effective teaching” as one that rules over his decision-making process. While he might well value effective teaching just as much, it would lose its place as that which unquestioningly determined what her choices would be.

Fifth order: the Self-transforming mind

Finally, Kegan offers a Fifth order, which is never seen before midlife and is seen only rarely then, although development beyond the Fourth order into the transition between the Fourth and the Fifth orders is more prevalent. Kegan (1994) reports that between 3% and 6% of adults aged 19-55 make meaning in the transition between the Fourth and Fifth orders; no adults in the studies Kegan reports made meaning fully at the Fifth order.

Adults at the Fifth order have achieved all that those at the Fourth order have, but in addition they have learned the limits of their own inner system—and the limits of full identification with any one inner system in general. Instead of viewing others as people with separate and different inner systems, those at the Fifth order can look across inner systems to see the similarities that are hidden within what used to look like differences. Adults at the Fifth order are less likely to see the world in terms of dichotomies or polarities. They are more likely to understand and deal well with paradox and with managing the tension of opposites. They are also more likely to believe that what we often think of as black and white are just various shades of gray whose differences are made more visible by the lighter or darker colors around them. While they still make use of their Fourth order Board of Directors, those at the Fifth order now recognize the inherent frailties of such Boards. They are more likely to consider the advantages not just of other opinions (which the Board might entertain) but of entirely different forms of governing systems. They may realize that their internal system itself contributes to their inability to perceive a wide enough field of alternatives.

Upon losing a job and living in unemployment, a Fifth-order person may say something like:

I think this is the journey. I think this is the journey. And I could stay in this, I think, forever. You know, I could never hold another job again, I could, you know, start doing Hospice work, I could you know, spend time with my family, I could…I don’t know…. I don’t know what to say. It just feels like it will emerge. But no, where I am right now feels very much like…it doesn’t feel like a hiatus. It feels like it is the journey and that work will emerge from this place. That’s what I think. I think work will emerge from this experience. So much has happened in my life in the past year that I had absolutely no control over, could not have predicted, and if it had turned out the way I intended, it would not have turned out as wonderful as it has. So at least for the time being, whatever emerges is what emerges. That is how I feel about it. And it doesn’t feel scary.

At the Fifth order, the ground constantly shifts and changes, but rather than feeling such seismic changes as an earthquake, those in the Fifth order expect them and lean into them the way on might lean into playful rapids on a river.

Stages 2-4 strongly, strongly resonate with my own experiences. (1 is harder to talk about, since I don’t remember that period of my life nearly as well.) I had thoughts like “I remember when this was my mental model; it’s like when X happened”, or “Mm right, Y occurred so I started working on a transition towards the next phase”. I could mark the approximate points where I started each transition, moving to the third order (what I often call “becoming self-conscious”) in grade 7 and starting to factor myself into my sphere of concern from grade 12 to some number of seasons ago. But coming to stage 5, my inner dialogue started sounding more like, “yes, yes, this is like, something that seems like the right next step! It seems like a valuable outlook! wait wait but how did you get there? how is this even attainable???” (Perhaps I exaggerate a bit – I do understand some of these concepts, to be sure. But the majority really fail to happen at a system 1 level.) (To be expanded upon)

And, sidenote: I also thought that this is similar to a model of how I feel the literary canon/meta has evolved, at least from orders 2-5. Imagine the world pre-modernism – actually, pre-Twain. People wrote in this certain elevated manner. People spoke in the same style of the prose surrounding the dialogue. It was very rules-driven, stylistically, and perhaps plot-wise as well. E.g. Dickens, Hardy, Austen, Hawthorne. Now transition towards stage 3, the telling of stories but grounded in a sort of realism. Dialects and casual conversation enter the picture. We move to the common man, the broken American dream. (Apologies for the American-centric canon on exhibit…) There’s a story, there’s a plot, there’s a moral that the author gets at. Hemingway, Twain, Steinbeck, Fitzgerald. You start to push the envelope with Joyce and Faulkner and Woolf – stream of consciousness is now a technique, and there’s this idea of creating whatever on earth the author feels like. See Beckett, perhaps Murakami or Calvino or Borges. Postmodernism poses these questions of the transition between 4 and 5 without any kind of resolution. Plotlines go on and disappear without resolution, or perhaps there is no plot at all. The very meaning of all conventions gets poked at (DFW, Pynchon, DeLillo).

This is now more of a pet theory, but I believe the current transition is moving towards the tale of the individual, the ‘realness’ of humanity. (See Alice Walker’s shorts, and some other ones that fail to come to mind at the moment.) Post-postmodernism would, I think, reject all these questions that feel this need to poke at the structure of everything, and just…accept things as are. Postmodernism does do this a bit, but not so explicitly in my opinion. There’s this notion of, okay, we’ve developed and delved and dug around, and it’s not going to go anywhere, and where we’re going doesn’t really matter anyway, let’s just bask in this...calm, serenity, now-ness that arises from being here, in the present, in our lives? …or something like this…

