---
layout: post
title: "Review: Mindstorms"
categories: [mental model]
comments: true
---

A couple years ago, my friend asked me, What is your most valuable resource? Without thinking too much (& almost by rote), I responded, Time. Try again, he said, and I thought a little more carefully. Ah, I see. Attention.

Attention: the act or state of applying the mind to something. Attention can take many forms, from willpower and concentration, to decision-making, to task-switching costs and multitasking. As an analogy, if the mind were a desk, it would be how clear the surface was. Like time or money, attention is a resource; for instance, one might pay attention to class to learn something, or to a person to show care. Though it might not seem that important at first (nobody says, “attention is money!”), I find that the limiting factor in getting my work done each day isn’t time; after all, I spend so many hours doing absolutely nothing. Instead, it’s something like focus, attention, willpower…

However, unlike time or money, CFAR teaches that attention is an inverse resource. Time and money have diminishing marginal returns, where if you have a little more, it matters less and less (having $10 is much better than $0, but $110 is pretty close to $100). But attention works the other way: the more you can free up, the more powerful each additional piece becomes. That is, if you have 10 distractors, just getting rid of not all that useful (you’re still distracted). On the other hand, if you only have 1 distractor left, freeing it up to be fully undistracted is very valuable.

To be more concrete, in my life this might look like: I have a big curriculum project I want to undertake which I keep tabbing over to and gives me some lingering sense of guilt; I’m trying to apply to jobs, so I occasionally take out a cover letter and edit it; I want to remember to pay the rent; I try to respond to my friends every time I see a notification; I wonder if I’m hungry and what to eat. This leads to me being fairly scatterbrained and feeling like nothing got done by the day’s end.

Yet when I limit the scope of what I do to just 3 things a day and have other systems in place to catch the other ideas – if I set up a reminder to pay my rent, send off my resume so I know I’ve already done what I can, and only check messages occasionally when I’m free enough to respond, then curriculum can get my full attention and I end up actually making progress towards my goals.

Some part of me feels this all feels just a little bit too hand-wavy. Distraction is a hard problem for me because it feels so good in the moment to work on whatever comes to mind instead of letting go and focusing on one narrowly-scoped thing. The most useful way to get back on track, for me, has been to remember the times in my life I’ve been most productive: powering through all the material for academic competitions, sitting down and finishing a book over an afternoon, drilling my lines dozens of times until I had it memorized for good, loading up all the necessary information into my working memory for tackling a project and getting it done in an all-nighter. These periods are productive not just because there’s a deadline looming, but particularly because the deadline forces me to focus single-mindedly.

My plans for Excolam back in September got fairly vague by April (i.e., now). I didn’t write nearly as much as I wanted to in March (I don’t think I worked on anything at all that month); though I don’t want to give up on writing either, right now it’s a balloon that has to float away. I’ll find it again later.

Right now, my priority is getting my curriculum together. I’ve been saying that for a year now, but with job applications looming or already sent in, it suddenly feels a lot more real. So, without further ado, here’s a plan for the coming months:

April & May: Every night I will list 3 tasks with time estimates for the next day. I will track my completion of these tasks, and 5/7 days should include at least one hour of curriculum development. Over each of these ~40 days, I will aim to outline an average of 3 classes (1 week) worth of material. That should give me the skeleton of what I need to teach.
June: Logistics of finalizing job plans and family travel will get in the way, so I plan to be able to dedicate 10 days or so to curriculum development. Over these sessions, I’d like to flesh out any gaps that existed from April & May (where I had to move forward for the sake of staying on schedule). Should that be completed early, I’d like to iterate on mediocre lessons.
July: Following the same meta structure as April and May, I’ll be as committed to curriculum, except with a focus on piloting instead of developing lessons (~20 sessions). I might start making a class website, posters for the room, and flipping some lectures (~10-20 sessions). I would also like to finish all of the tier 2 work for graduate school (~40 sessions). By now, I should be ready to teach if necessary.
August, first half: Ideally nothing will be left to do to brace myself for the coming year, but I’ll leave myself this buffer for cleaning up. I want to enter the school year such that nightly preparation entails a) gathering/printing necessary material in under 5 minutes, b) reading no more than a paragraph and some bullet points to feel ready to teach, and c) quickly seeing where I think the biggest room for improvement is on a given lesson (should I have time to improve it before implementation). I want my work over the course of the school year to be improving, not creating, the material. Lastly, I’d like to reserve weekends fully for reading, writing, & relaxing.
This marks the end of the first Excolam. Was it as successful as I hoped on the object level? Not really. I’m disappointed with how little “real work” I’ve done, though I admit it’s probably more than I’d have managed without this framework. But was it useful on a meta-level? I think so. I feel better about how I’ve spent my time these past few months, and while some may say feeling good is not enough, I think that’s one of the goals at the end of hte day. I’ve also learned more about how attention works for me and where my time goes, and am surprised that simply tracking these things helps me be more productive (just as wearing a pedometer without a goal makes one walk more). Obviously, there’s still tons of room to grow, but reflecting on the spirit of Rubin’s own project that inspired this all, I’ve somehow actually become happier.
